Chapter 1:  Introduction
===========================

..
    * What is the Internet?
        * Importance of communications networks / the Internet

The Internet is a global network of interconnected computer networks that
forms the basis of much modern communication, including web browsing,
messaging, email, video conferencing, on-demand movies, and gaming. Over time,
it has come to constitute critical infrastructure, as much of society depends
on the Internet for work, education, and recreation. The Internet is indeed
central to just about every aspect of modern life that we can think of. The
COVID-19 pandemic, in particular, highlighted the importance of Internet
access---and the dire consequences to work, health, education, and education
for those without reliable Internet access.

..
    * The Internet needs to be managed.
        * Short-term management
             * Detecting/responding to security incidents
             * Detecting/diagnosing performance issues  
             * Device fingerprinting, inventory, etc.  
             * Closed-loop control (e.g., routing that adapts to failures, is performance-aware, etc.)  
        * Long-term management  
             * Forecasting (for provisioning)
        * There's a long history of humans doing these tasks (e.g., cite network operator groups)
        * Systems/networks could once be modeled in closed form. Much harder now.
        * There have always been some aspects of these tasks that are automated
          (to some degree), such as intrusion detection and there's some
          opportunity now to automate more.

Yet, despite the critical importance of the Internet, it is prone to
failures, misconfigurations, and attacks that can lead to disruptions of
connectivity and service, leading to downtime that can cause significant
inconvenience to users. The Internet is not a self-managing system: as
problems arise, network operators must detect, diagnose, and fix these
problems so that users can enjoy good performance and uninterrupted service.
This process of *network management* involves monitoring the network for
aberrations and fixing problems as (or before) they arise, so that the network
can continue to run well.

How Networks Run
----------------

To maintain good performance for the applications they must support, networks
must continually adapt to changing conditions. For example, when a component
of the network fails, either due to misconfiguration or a hardware failure,
the network must be able to detect the failure and reroute traffic around the
failed component. Similarly, when the network is congested or traffic demands
change, the network must reroute traffic around the link or provision
additional capacity. Finally, when a new application is deployed, the
network must be configured to support the application's requirements. These
tasks are often referred to as *network management*.

In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic was a testament to the importance of network
management---and the fact that networks don't just automatically adapt to
these changes (yet), but rather than human network engineers and operators
needed to respond to the changing conditions that resulted from sudden and
dramatic changes to traffic patterns. Specifically, as much of society shifted
to working from home, Internet traffic patterns changed dramatically. Traffic
that previously was exchanged on enterprise, corporate, and university
networks suddenly shifted to home networks; video conference traffic from home
networks skyrocketed, placing unprecedented load and strain on home networks.
And yet, despite predictions of its demise, the Internet actually handled
these dramatic shifts quite well.

The process of adapting to these changes, however, was not automatic. Network
management tasks on both short and long timescales ensured that the Internet
continued to operate well in spite of these dramatic shifts. In the short
term, network operators needed to detect and respond to various performance
issues, as sudden shifts in traffic placed unprecedented strain on parts of
the network: For example, as more traffic shifted to video conferencing, the
traffic volumes between access Internet service providers and the cloud
service providers hosting Zoom, WebEx, Teams, and other video conference
services introduced higher traffic loads, which (at least temporarily)
introduced additional congestion on the network. Similarly, as entertainment
stayed home, traffic volumes to video on demand services increased beyond
normal levels.

In general, communications networks need to be continually maintained by
humans, who are typically referred to as *network operators*. Network
management tasks can be *short-term* or *long-term*. Short-term tasks involve
responding to equipment or infrastructure failures, sudden and unexpected
changes in traffic load, and attacks. Long-term tasks involve provisioning
capacity, establishing and satisfying service-level agreements, or making
other more substantial changes to infrastructure. All of these tasks typically
require a careful process, sometimes involving simulations or models to help
predict how a particular change to network configuration or infrastructure
might ultimately affect how traffic flows through the network and, ultimately,
user experience. 

For a long time, these network management tasks tasks have typically relied on
extensive domain knowledge---and a lot of trial and error. These tasks have
also become more difficult and error-prone, even as the systems themselves
have become more complex. The need to predict the outcomes of these
tasks---and automate them---has become particularly challenging. Whereas
several decades ago, the networking industry had some success in creating
closed-form models and simulations of protocols, applications and systems,
today these systems are far too complex for closed-form analysis.

The Role of Machine Learning
----------------------------

..
    * What is ML?
        * Definitions of ML:
            * "The ability to learn without being explicitly programmed." (Samuel 1952)
            * "A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some task T and some performance measure P, if its performance on T, as measured by P, improves with experience E.‚Äù (Mitchell 1997)
        * Contrast with "standard" algorithms. Historically, networks have
          operated/run based on well-defined algorithms, tools, techniques, etc.
        * Themes:
            * Recognizing patterns in data
            * Predictions based on past data/observations
            * Inference of things that cannot be directly measured
            * Generation of synthetic data

The complexity of network management has been contemporaneous with several
other trends: (1) the ability to collect an increasing amount of data from
(and about) the network; and (2) the emergence of practical *machine learning*
models and algorithms that can make this prediction easier.  

Before understanding how machine learning can improve the operation of
communications networks, we must first understand what machine learning is,
and how it might be used. Early definitions of machine learning date to the
1950s. Samuel defined machine learning as "the ability to learn without being
explicitly programmed". In the 1990s, Mitchell refined this definition: "A
computer program is said to learn from experience E, with respect to some task
T and some performance measure P, if its performance on T, as measured by P,
improves with experience E." In this book, we will explore a wide array of
machine learning algorithms, but some of the more common themes include
recognizing patterns in data, making predictions based on past data or
observations, inferring properties that cannot be directly measured, and
automatic generation of synthetic data.

.. _fig-ml-loop:
.. figure:: ../figures/ml-loop.png
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

   Machine learning control loop.

|

:numref:`Figure %s <fig-ml-loop>` illustrates the potential role of machine learning in the
network ecosystem. The network produces much information for a network
operator to make sense of, including raw traffic flow records, summary
statistics, and even user feedback. *Measurement*, which we will discuss in
detail in Chapter 3, is the process by which this raw data can be generated.
Data from measurement forms the input to machine learning models.
Subsequently, machine learning models can use that data as input, to make
predictions or otherwise infer information about the network (e.g., the
presence of an attack, the performance of a particular application, a user's
experience).

..
    * A note on automation. Other network technologies (e.g., SDN) seek to
      automate certain aspects of control (programmatically). We focus on a
      complementary aspect: automated decision-making, inference, etc.
      Ultimately the ability to do these things could be coupled with
      automated/programmatic control.       
    * (Footnote on causality.)          
 
Given inference or prediction from a model, a network operator can then make
decisions about possible changes to a network. Those changes might be
implemented directly (and manually) by a network operator; or perhaps in some
automated fashion, such as through a program that automatically updates
the network configuration. Recent trends in networking have called this
closed-loop control a "self-driving network"; in fact, most of the time
updates to network configuration typically involve a human in the loop. In
this sense, the application of machine learning to networking is complementary
to another trend in networking called *software-defined networking*, which
seeks to add programmatic control to network configuration---and,
particularly, to control the *actions* on network traffic, such as how traffic
us forwarded. Knowing what changes to make in the first place, however,
requires the ability to infer, forecast, and predict, so that the appropriate
changes can be made in the first place. 

Why Now?
--------
..       
    * What's the history? and Why now?
        * History
            * Mid-2000s: Closed-form modeling of complex systems (for security, prediction, etc.)
            * DARPA IDS challenge, spam filters, ‚Ä¶
            * From signatures to statistical classification/detection
            * Offline detection algorithms: traffic classification, botnet detection, ‚Ä¶
        * Why now?
            * Breakthroughs: Programmable telemetry, ML libraries, automated ML

Machine learning has been applied to networking since the mid-1990s, dating
back to the design of early email spam filters, as well as early anomaly and
malware detection systems on closed datasets (e.g., the DARPA 1999 KDD
challenge). In the mid-2000s, machine learning applications to networking
experienced a renaissance, with applications to both network security and
performance. In the security realm, researchers devised techniques to use
network traffic as inputs for machine learning models that detect "botnets",
large armies of compromised hosts that launch large-scale Internet attacks.
Others determined that applying machine learning to network traffic could be a
far more robust technique for detecting email spam than analyzing the contents
of the mail.
Applications of machine learning in these domains ultimately formed the basis
of a wide array of commercial products in the network security space, from
startups to Fortune 500 companies.
A few years later, machine learning emerged as a feasible approach for
predicting the performance of networked systems that were difficult to model
in closed form. For example, researchers developed machine learning models
for predicting how network configuration changes would ultimately affect
the performance of a web application, such as web search response time. 

Applications of machine learning to networking in the mid-2000s led to
substantial advances in network management in the realms of both security and
performance. From a security perspective, modeling network traffic enabled
detection of new, previously unseen attacks. These models also assisted with
performance prediction and diagnosis: Previously, protocols and systems were
simple enough to analyze in closed form, but as networked services and
applications such as web hosting, content distribution, and distributed
dynamic applications became more prevalent, systems became too complex to
model in closed form. Machine learning began to show significant promise in
this era, but most of the applications of machine learning remained focused on
*offline* detection and prediction.

Now, nearly 20 years later, machine learning is experiencing yet another
rebirth in networking. The "democratization" of machine learning through
widely available software libraries and tools and the automation of many machine
learning pipelines make machine learning more widely accessible to those who
wish to apply it to existing datasets. To complement these developments, the
emergence of programmable network telemetry has made it more possible to
gather a wide variety of network traffic data---and different representations
of that traffic---from the network, often in real-time. The combination of
these two developments has created vast possibilities for how machine learning
can be applied to networking, from long-term prediction and forecasting, to
short-term diagnosis, to real-time adaptation to changing conditions.

What You Will Learn in This Book
--------------------------------

..
    * What you will learn from this book
        * Network measurement
            * Different types of network data
            * What you can learn/infer from different types of network data
            * Measurement techniques  
            * New directions in network measurement and data representation
              (telemetry, representations, etc.)  
        * Machine learning methods  
            * Exposure to a wide variety of methods
            * An understanding of how the methods work, when they are appropriate, etc.
        * Applying ML methods to real-world problems in networking, 
            * Working with network data
            * Data exploration, understanding, and representation 
            * Pipelines   
        * Technical pitfalls (e.g., overfitting, bias, drift, training/testing cost)
        * Privacy, legal, and ethical concerns    
        * Looking ahead

This book offers a practical introduction to network measurement, machine
learning methods and models, and applications. We will explore the details of
network measurement, in particular the different types of network data that
are available given current network devices, from routers to middleboxes,
including the techniques for gathering and acquiring network data; what is possible to
learn and infer from different types of network data; and new directions in
network measurement and data representation, from advances in network
telemetry to existing and emerging ways of representing network data for input
to models.

.. sidebar:: Activity: Packet Capture Basics

    Many of the concepts in this book will be introduced through examples and
    exercises.  The :ref:`Appendix <appendix-basics>` includes an activity for
    performing simple analysis of a packet capture.  We will get into more of the
    details of network data in subsequent chapters. This example will give you a
    chance to get familiar with basic network data and how to load this type of
    data into a Jupyter notebook. 

Equipped with a better understanding of how various data is acquired from the
network, we will then turn to an overview of machine learning methods. This
book is not designed to give you a detailed overview or mathematical
foundations behind each of the models---there are plenty of books out there
for that already. Our goal in this book, rather, is to give you exposure to a
variety of methods, show examples of how these models and methods can be
applied in practice, provide an understanding of how these methods work, as
well as when a particular model might be appropriate or not to apply for a
particular dataset. A large focus of the book is also on how to *apply* these
models in practice; as a result, we will focus significant attention on data
acquisition, and representation---as we will see, the choice of how to
represent the data to a model is often as important as the choice of model
itself.

This practical view of machine learning for networking necessitates a focus on
the entire *machine learning pipeline*, from data acquisition to model
maintenance. Whereas most machine learning courses and textbooks focus on the
modeling aspects of machine learning in isolation, in practice, the machine
learning models themselves are but a small contributor to the overall
effectiveness of prediction and inference. As such, we will explore all
aspects of the machine learning and data science pipeline, from data
acquisition to model deployment and maintenance, to the ethical and legal
concerns surrounding applications of machine learning for networking.


